[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA GARR: Would you like to
live a life with no regrets?
Many articles are written
about the regrets of the dying.
And they say that they
regretted working too much
and spending too little
time with family.
And the truth is that we
all will die at some point.
It's an illusion to think
that we will live forever
in this body.
And if we really want to
live a conscious life,
we also need to be conscious
about the dying process
and identify the death
phobia in our culture.
And someone who has
dedicated her life
to the conscious dying process
is shamanic practitioner Kitty
Edwards.
She's the executive director
of the No Regrets Project.
And it's a program for the
Living and Dying Consciously
Project, where
Kitty helps people
become aware of the living
and the dying process.
What you do is phenomenal.
>>KITTY EDWARDS: It is.
It is.
>>LISA: Where does this death
phobia come from, Kitty?
>>EDWARDS: Oh, well
I think everyone's
afraid of death in
any time period.
It's not the phobia
that's unusual,
it's how secret we keep
death from the culture.
We put people who are
terminally ill in hospitals,
and they're separated from
their families, oftentimes.
They're isolated in
a room, by themselves
or with another person.
And they don't
have the traditions
of rituals that might
go on in a community
to support their dying.
So I think the fear is
greater in our culture.
>>LISA: It hasn't always
been like this, of course.
The traditions are amazing
around death and ceremony.
>>EDWARDS: Oh, absolutely.
And realize death
happened really close by.
It always happened at
home or in the streets,
or you could see it, you could
touch it, you could smell it.
It was a part of
your everyday life.
So as a child, you would
have witnessed many deaths
by the time you were
in your 20s or 30s
because just the
community around you.
Doors were open
when people died.
You went to visit
You held each other's
hearts when people died.
And now, we tend to isolate.
And that's hard.
>>LISA: I mean, it's
the same process when
you lose a loved one and
you have pain and you feel.
And I'm talking about in
the traditional times.
And they would honor that
process with time and ceremony
and tradition.
Many cultures, and
the Jewish culture
still does this with
the sitting shiva,
and there's a lot of great
ways to honor and mourn.
>>EDWARDS: Right.
>>LISA: But we have lost
it so much in this culture.
>>EDWARDS: Yes.
Many people have lost their
traditional religious beliefs
or their community within
a religious belief.
And therefore, they're
not practicing rituals.
They're not familiar with them.
And when they come in
contact with them, say
in the Jewish tradition,
they don't resonate with them
anymore.
They're very rich traditions,
but in our modern lives,
we live such busy lives.
Our traditional rituals
are not alive for us now.
>>LISA: Well, let's talk about
that because it is easier,
almost, to not grieve.
It is almost easier
to not sit and stare,
and to involve
yourself with things
and the business of death,
and the certificates
and the notifications
and all that.
It can get really distracting.
>>EDWARDS: It's.
Hard
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>EDWARDS: It's hard.
Death is hard for the families
and for the person who's dying.
It's a challenge.
It's a challenge to live
consciously all the way
to the threshold of death,
and stay in heart connection
with your loved ones
and your community
and those things that
make you so human.
And then when you're dealing
with death certificates, all
the bureaucracy of it,
our whole medical system
does not deal with death
and approaching death.
Many doctors I work with
perceive death as the enemy.
And so if death
is the enemy, you
can never let it in the door.
You can never admit
that it's happening.
Otherwise, you're admitting
as a doctor you have failed,
in some way.
>>LISA: They're in the
life business, the saving
business, yes.
Not in the death business.
>>EDWARDS: And that's great.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>EDWARDS: We all want that.
>>EDWARDS: But when
someone is dying,
we need to have a different
approach to things.
And I think hospice has created
a different way of holding
people that way, because
grief doesn't start
happening at the
time of death, it
starts at the
terminal diagnosis.
And our grief, sometimes we
don't want to step into that.
Sometimes we have to work,
and we can't step into that.
So we push things aside.
So it's easier to pretend
it's not happening.
And that's the way it
used to happen quite a bit
in the '50s, where they
wouldn't even tell patients
they were dying, but
the family would know.
And that was
really, really hard.
And so I think the
whole hospice movement
and bringing the death
terminology to hospitals
has helped somewhat, but
we've got a ways to go.
>>LISA: Yes.
What is hospice?
>>EDWARDS: Well, hospice
is an organization,
either for-profit or non-profit.
It's an organization
that works in teams.
So there will be a doctor.
If you enter a
hospice organization,
you would have a
terminal illness,
and a doctor would have
said, you're probably
going to die within six months.
And they would set
up a team for you.
And there would be a
doctor on your team,
a nurse on your team, a
chaplain on your team,
a social worker to help you
get the equipment you need,
and then a CNA,
most importantly.
A CNA, a certified
nursing assistant
who can come and help you
eat and bathe and dress
and all those things that
maybe are a little more
difficult for you to do.
So the team approach is
really the miracle of hospice.
>>LISA: When did
that get created?
>>EDWARDS: Well, it started
in England in the early '70s.
Late '60s, '70s.
In this country, it came
over around '75, '76.
>>LISA: That is--
it's phenomenal.
And I'm sure it comes from
traditions of what is needed.
>>EDWARDS: Right.
Nursing traditions.
>>LISA: Nursing traditions.
>>EDWARDS: Yeah.
Because the nurse is there.
They see what needs to happen.
And in our previous
conversations,
we talked about Kubler-Ross,
who worked with the dying
and listened to the
dying about their needs
and their experiences.
And she was able to articulate
what the needs of the dying
are and, in her vernacular,
the stages of dying,
which we've talked about, too.
>>LISA: Which is also
the stages of grief.
>>EDWARDS: Absolutely.
>>LISA: It works for both
the dying and the grieving.
>>EDWARDS: Mhm.
Denial.
We've talked about denial.
>>LISA: Denial, yes.
>>EDWARDS: And that
fear that comes up,
and depression, where you
just can't function at all.
So all of these things
do happen in grief,
and they happen as
you approach death.
>>LISA: As you approach death.
So the five stages--
denial, acceptance,
bargaining, making that why--
take me instead of my--
I saw my mom do that, take me.
The depression, which is
the hundred-yard stare,
and trying to-- and stopping
when you're trying to do
regular things,
and you just can't.
>>EDWARDS: Right.
Stops you in your tracks.
Yeah.
These stages aren't
a linear pattern.
They go up.
They go down.
They come, they circle around.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>EDWARDS: And so grief will be
your next challenge, of course,
with yourself--
>>LISA: Yes.
>>EDWARDS: --and your family.
>>LISA: Oh, I've seen it.
Now, anger, which is the
fifth one I didn't mention,
I saw that one first.
I saw that come out first.
How normal is it to be angry?
>>EDWARDS: Well, oftentimes
when people are angry,
it's because they're not
getting their needs met.
A lot of psychologists
that work with emotions
try to take apart emotions.
And if you're angry, it's
good to look at your anger
and see where it's coming from.
And if you're dying and
you can't express it
and you have no one else to
talk about it because nobody
wants to talk about it, then
anger could be expressed.
>>LISA: My dad went
through a period
where he was angry at my
mom for being able to walk
because he couldn't anymore.
>>EDWARDS: Right.
>>LISA: And his legs were
completely failing at the end.
And he just would
watch my mom walk in,
and he would just get angry.
And I was trying to explain to
her not to take it personally.
>>EDWARDS: Right.
>>LISA: But because
they had been
an interpersonal relationship
for 57, 58 years.
>>EDWARDS: Well, it could be
possible he doesn't really
want her waiting on
him, and he wants
to be able to get
up and take care
of Himself he's self-reliant.
That's who he is.
He's powerful,
he's self-reliant.
And you get angry when
you have a loss like that.
>>LISA: So those stages of
death come in for terminal
illness and the grieving, yes.
You go through all
of these undulations.
It kind of helps to know--
but does it help to know
that these stages exist,
and that we're going to
go through all of this?
>>EDWARDS: Well, it helps to
be aware, but what really helps
is to prepare for death.
And there are many deaths
that we experience.
A divorce is a death.
>>LISA: Job loss.
>>EDWARDS: A loss of a job.
Huge.
Grief associated with
that, anger, depression.
>>LISA: Bargaining.
>>EDWARDS: Bargaining,
yeah, all the--
so these are something that
we live with all the time.
And so to be aware of what your
emotions are and what they mean
is very important, but it's
also important to be aware
that we're going to go
through deaths over and over.
And the more we practice
with death, and saying,
oh, this is a death, OK.
>>LISA: This is why
I think that it's
so important to have
this conversation,
because you bring ceremony
back into this process.
And ceremony allows
energy to move.
>>EDWARDS: Yes.
>>LISA: It moves
the energy of death.
It moves the energy of grief.
Not that we need to
get over it, but it
helps it not get so sedentary
and so painful and stuck.
>>EDWARDS: Yeah, I
think what ritual does,
too, it moves energy, but it
also takes us out of our heads,
out of our heads, and brings
us down into our hearts.
And when we can be
in our heart, we
can make a heart connection
with our families,
our friends, our departed.
>>LISA: That's tough
when they're gone.
>>EDWARDS: I know.
I know.
>>LISA: That's hard.
What is it that you do as
a shamanic practitioner?
>>EDWARDS: Well, with
a private client,
I work a lot with
people who cannot speak,
either from a stroke or some
disability caused by a terminal
illness.
And our health care
system doesn't really
function very well with
people that don't speak.
But I do energy work,
so we can communicate
using energy work, which
would be even like,
you know, if I do this,
it's exchanging energy.
Or if I just send you heart,
that's exchanging energy.
And I've been trained
to sort of amp
that energy up in order to be
able to communicate and shift
for people their fears, their
anger, their depression--
>>LISA: Yes.
>>EDWARDS: --and their hope.
>>LISA: And you have these
beautiful rituals around these
we're going to talk
about in a second,
but I wanted to ask
you, where did you start
to learn about all of this?
What around curiosity
piqued your curiosity
about helping the
death and dying?
>>EDWARDS: Well, I've
been working in death
since I was six years old.
And I didn't really realize
I was working with death.
It just seemed like
people were dying
and I was sitting with them.
It was not until my
early 30s that my brother
said something to me
like, why is it you know
all these people who are dying?
And I asked him, I
said, what do you mean?
Don't you know
people who are dying?
He said, I don't
know anyone dying.
And I thought, well, either
he's nuts or I'm nuts.
So I guess I'm the unusual one.
But that's something
I've done all my life.
So people know I'm comfortable
with death, so they call on me.
But how I got into shamanism
is a different story.
I was working on
a writing project,
doing research in Borneo.
And I started reading about
the shamans, the medicine men
and women of Borneo,
and I got to work
with a couple of medicine
men doing trance work.
And it was so fascinating.
I thought when I
came home, maybe
I can find out somebody
who's doing something here
in the States.
And so I was able to go into
shamanic training programs,
and then was able to go
down to South America
and work with the Q'iru in Peru,
and also with some medicine men
and women in Bolivia.
So I've sort of jumped
all over the place.
>>LISA: And you've brought
back some traditions
that really could help.
Was that a yearning for you when
you were learning about what
exists elsewhere and
how it could really
help people in the US?
>>EDWARDS: Yes.
I think in the beginning, I
was just trying to help myself.
It was so rich.
It cracked me open.
It helped me be present and
realize what kind of power
I might have or not have
in different circumstances.
>>LISA: Ah.
>>EDWARDS: So it sort of
made me fearless, in a way,
so that I could see
that we're so much
more than we think we are.
And when you learn techniques
that are just like magic,
it's like, wow.
Yes, and then you can bring it
to the people you work with.
>>LISA: That was a beautiful
way of explaining it.
You just migrated
towards people who
were dying when you were young.
Did you lose your
parents at a young age?
>>EDWARDS: No, I didn't, but
I had a near-death experience
at six months, and
again at age 16.
>>LISA: That you remembered?
>>EDWARDS: I didn't remember
until I did some work later on,
but I had heart
surgery at age 16.
And I was able to
experience, as you mentioned.
I would have loved to have
a comedy routine going on
in the middle of heart surgery.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>EDWARDS: So I had that
experience of being out of body
that I did remember,
but that was so weird
that I never shared it with
anyone until much later,
when I realized, OK, that's
what makes me comfortable.
Going back and forth
and here and there, so.
>>LISA: So you're very familiar
with going between worlds.
>>EDWARDS: Yeah.
>>LISA: That's very
common for you.
>>EDWARDS: It is now.
I have a language
for it, and I have
tools to actually do it in a
safe and not a traumatic way.
I don't have to be
shot out of my body.
>>LISA: Yeah, that's important.
I don't recommend it.
>>EDWARDS: That's not fun.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>EDWARDS: Yeah,
so it's much more--
>>LISA: The precursor to
near-death experience is
usually trauma, and--
>>EDWARDS: That's
not a good thing.
>>LISA: No, it's not.
But if we can learn to do
this in a different way
and really learn to
go between worlds,
I think that is fascinating.
>>EDWARDS: Oh, it's great fun.
>>LISA: Oh, yeah.
>>EDWARDS: Yeah.
>>LISA: And you know, especially
comforting for the grieving,
because I still--
my father was a
scientist, and he
I believe he was grappling with,
at the end of his life, if I
just shut my eyes,
do the lights go out?
Is that it?
And I felt him really
grappling with that.
I was getting these dreams
where he was just saying--
and I remember this
specific dream,
as if he came to me in my dream,
and he said, how do I do this?
How do I do it?
Do I just close my eyes
and the lights go out?
As a scientist, he needed
evidence of things.
God bless him.
We need our scientists
in the world.
And I was trying to explain
or show him there's light
and there's peace
and there's expansion
and there's interconnectedness
like you've never
seen in this world before.
And I was trying to show him
these things in the dream
space.
And I feel, when he finally
did make his transition,
I was able to--
I was actually in a meditation.
I wasn't in front of
him, I was away from him.
And I was in a meditation.
And I felt this giant
explosion, this burst of light.
I was facilitated by a
friend of mine, Dane, here.
And he was so amazing.
And he said, my dear, this
is a bit of my specialty,
are you ready?
And I didn't know what he
was really talking about.
We went into this
kind of trance,
and my father's
spirit was with us,
and it was on the
phone with Dane.
And just this burst of light.
And I floated out of my body.
But that was my dream, was to
usher my dad's soul into what
I know as the afterlife.
And I got to experience that.
>>EDWARDS:
Oftentimes, the people
who are transitioning
do anticipate.
If they can't let go of
someone, like your mother,
they wait until your
mother's out of the room.
>>LISA: Isn't that magical?
>>EDWARDS: Yeah.
And your brother needed
the physical reality.
He's probably someone
like your father.
He needed that reality--
>>LISA: He did.
>>EDWARDS: --of being
present with the body when
the body stopped living.
>>LISA: When he stopped--
when he took his last breath.
>>EDWARDS: Yeah.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>EDWARDS: And your
father showed you
that you were able to escort
him across the threshold.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>EDWARDS: What a gift.
>>EDWARDS: Your
father's wonderful.
>>LISA: Oh.
>>EDWARDS: He did
it just perfectly.
>>LISA: And even
though it didn't
feel-- if anyone's
going through this,
and they're looking at their
beloved passing and crossing,
and it doesn't appear
they're there, it does not,
for all the logical mind,
appear that they're there,
if they've had a
stroke or anything,
I read Jill Bolte Taylor's
book, which was so amazing.
She was the
neurosurgeon in a coma.
>>EDWARDS: Right.
>>LISA: And she said,
"they can hear you."
>>EDWARDS: Absolutely.
>>LISA: Olfactory, the
hearing is the last to go,
the last sense to go.
They can hear you.
The stroke victims
can hear patients.
Can hear.
They can hear.
>>EDWARDS: Right.
>>LISA: So what
you're saying, it
lands on a soul,
the essence of it.
And that is it a huge
thing that I learned.
It's so true.
>>EDWARDS: Oh, so
realistically, too.
So dying consciously
is living consciously
all the way up to the end.
And you're talking
about the senses.
The last thing you hear,
the last thing you smell,
the last thing you touch
are all so important.
Living consciously is
an essential endeavor.
And if we can live
consciously, knowing
that death is inevitable, we can
wake ourselves up to living--
>>LISA: More fully.
>>EDWARDS: --and dying.
>>LISA: And dying more fully?
>>EDWARDS: Dying.
Just being aware of
the dying, and working
with our hopes and our fears
and our heart connections
with our loved ones.
Dying consciously is
about living consciously.
>>LISA: That's brave.
>>EDWARDS: It is brave.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>EDWARDS: It's a
brave new world.
>>LISA: It's very brave.
>>EDWARDS: But.
>>LISA: Well, there are--
you know, what you do here
in conscious transitions
and living with
dying, we all do it.
>>EDWARDS: Right.
>>LISA: We're all
living with dying.
>>EDWARDS: Yeah.
We can't really
escape it, can we?
>>LISA: No.
>>EDWARDS: No.
We can deny it--
>>LISA: It's an illusion.
>>EDWARDS: --we can't escape it.
>>LISA: No.
>>EDWARDS: So what
we teach is that you
can prepare for death
as a rite of passage,
as a time of transition.
And we teach four or
five different ways
to prepare for death.
And it's really up
to the individual
what they may choose to do.
The first thing is to get
your literal documents.
Your living will, appoint
your medical agent.
Get your last will
and testament,
get things in order so that
you are consciously preparing.
>>LISA: Before
you even get sick.
>>EDWARDS: Oh, yes.
>>LISA: Before anything happens.
Just now.
>>EDWARDS: Just now.
Everybody should do it.
>>LISA: Not that everybody
needs to get sick, by the way.
I didn't mean to program it.
>>EDWARDS: No, no, no.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>EDWARDS: But they
need to prepare.
>>LISA: Prepare.
>>EDWARDS: Yeah.
>>LISA: OK.
>>EDWARDS: And then another
level of preparation
is your emotional, to really
work with your emotions
and start to understand
what does anger mean to me.
What is that when I get angry?
Am I frustrated with myself?
Is there a need
that's not being met?
And it's different
for different people.
When I'm sad, where does
the sadness come from?
And how do I get
out of the sadness,
or how do I work
with the sadness?
Some days, I just
have to be sad.
So if you know more
about your emotions,
and you know how to let go
and shift those emotions
and have a practice like
meditation or heart map.
>>LISA: Visualization,
heart map.
>>EDWARDS: --yeah
visualization--
that you can work
with your emotions
in order to be able
to come to some peace.
But you can't do it
on your deathbed.
You can't start it
You need to start much
earlier so that you're
aware of who you are.
And then there's the
mythic preparations.
And this is the fun part.
The storytelling.
>>LISA: Yes.
We did a lot of that.
>>EDWARDS: The legacy we're--
what legacies you're leaving.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>EDWARDS: And I'm not talking
about necessarily big legacies.
It can be little teeny legacies
of love and peace and family.
>>LISA: The thing is
about it the instant, when
somebody dies quickly.
>>EDWARDS: Oh, yes,
that's very traumatic.
>>LISA: The shock
takes a long time.
>>EDWARDS: Right, yeah.
A traumatic death and
certain sudden death
complicates the grief because
you don't get to say goodbye.
You don't have an opportunity
to say I love you.
At least, you feel you
don't have an opportunity
to say that.
And there's a lot
of guilt involved.
What could I have done
to make this different?
>>LISA: Yes.
>>EDWARDS: You know,
did we have to go
to the grocery store that
day, did we have to do this.
Why didn't I see this coming?
So there's a lot
of guilt that we
have to work with in
the middle of our grief.
So sudden death, suicide, very
complicated in our culture.
>>LISA: Yes.
And that's happening
more and more lately.
>>EDWARDS: Yes.
>>LISA: I mean,
from the other side,
even though someone
has a terminal illness,
it still feels sudden.
And I know anyone who's
gone through that experience
with a loved one knows
what I'm talking about.
It still feels sudden.
>>EDWARDS: Right.
>>LISA: Yes, you
could see it coming,
but you're never ready for it.
>>EDWARDS: No, you're
never ready for it.
But you did have
the opportunity to--
>>LISA: God bless, yeah.
>>EDWARDS: --laugh
and tell stories and--
>>LISA: Listen to music.
>>EDWARDS: --listen
to music and hug and--
>>LISA: Yes, touch and caress.
And we did it all.
We even fought.
>>EDWARDS: Oh,
that's the best part.
>>LISA: It was funny because
we wound up laughing about it.
Because you know,
tensions rise, and there's
so many decisions to make.
>>EDWARDS: Yeah.
>>LISA: Should we give him
this drug, should we not,
dah, dah, dah.
There's a lot of
decisions to make.
But I want to go back to
the traumatic part of this
and where a person goes
into shock, because there's
a piece to the passages,
the rites of passage that
is the ceremony piece, the
death rites, the vigil.
What types of ceremony
do you suggest--
no matter what the
transition, how
can people process it,
hold that sacred space?
>>EDWARDS: Well, certainly
at the time someone dies,
if you're with them,
like your brother was,
it might take a
little foreplanning,
but to have a little
ritual, even if you just
put your hand on their heart,
if your brother could do that.
He probably was holding
your father's hand.
>>LISA: Yes, he was.
>>EDWARDS: Yeah.
And he can, you know,
sing a song, say a prayer,
say thank you.
But it would take
some forethought,
because immediately,
that is a shock.
We're not ready for
it to actually happen.
So you need to have
a little forethought.
>>LISA: Yeah, and his
numbers were actually
increasing and rising, his
breaths per minute were rising.
>>EDWARDS: He was doing
better, you perceived.
>>LISA: I heard that's common.
>>EDWARDS: Yes.
Yeah.
There's an energy.
I mean, when someone's
dying, there's an energy.
I mean, the will to
live is very strong,
and so there's often
a sort of a healing.
Sometimes people
sit up and speak.
>>LISA: Right.
A surge.
>>EDWARDS: There's a
surge of energy, yeah.
>>LISA: And what does--
does it just go away?
>>EDWARDS: Well,
the body is dying.
>>LISA: Yeah, OK.
>>EDWARDS: And the
body is fighting it.
And so it's really--
it's a fight.
It's, you know, I want to stay,
I want to stay, I want to stay,
and you're really fighting hard.
Like your immune system has
to really get strong and fight
disease right before the end.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>EDWARDS: Some
people are in a coma
and they don't have that surge
of energy that's perceptible.
>>LISA: But that is
very common, isn't it?
>>EDWARDS: Yes.
>>LISA: Yeah, so
the perception is
they're getting better, which is
why we walked out of the room.
>>EDWARDS: But your
father, it seems
like he needed you to leave.
>>LISA: Yes.
And we're really
clear about that.
>>EDWARDS: He's tricky that way.
>>LISA: Yeah.
He was taking care
of us all to the end.
>>EDWARDS: He was.
>>LISA: And he still is.
>>EDWARDS: Yes.
>>LISA: He still is.
>>EDWARDS: Yes, he is.
I was telling you
about a funeral
we just did last weekend,
which was a wonderful ceremony.
A lot of grieving.
It was a suicide.
It was sudden.
Large family, lot of grief.
But the family needed to come
together, which they did,
in ceremony in order to
release their loved one.
Release him to let go,
which is really hard to do.
Sometimes we call it
giving permission to die,
even after someone's died.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>EDWARDS: Because if we
can't give them permission,
then our grief is going to
hold tight to our heart.
>>LISA: And let the
soul travel, right?
Let the soul be free.
>>EDWARDS: Yeah.
>>LISA: You told me
the story of a lake.
>>EDWARDS: That's
an Ojibwe legend,
or it's actually a tradition.
They live on lakes,
and their tradition
is that they build a canoe
with love for the departed one.
And they set the
canoe out on the lake.
And with their grief, the energy
of their grief, their wailing,
their weeping, their
begging, please don't leave,
they ship that canoe,
causing ripples in the lake.
And the canoe begins to move.
And on this lake,
there is the village
of the living who
are grieving, and on
the far distant side of the
lake is the village of the dead.
And you can hear
through the mist--
you can't see that far, but
you hear them celebrating
and calling the departed.
Come on over, we
can't wait to see you.
The ancestors are there
to hold the departed.
And so with our grief in
the village of the living,
we continue to push the
canoe across the lake.
>>LISA: I love this.
It gives grief a purpose.
>>EDWARDS: Yes.
>>LISA: It gives grief motion.
>>EDWARDS: Right.
>>LISA: It doesn't
disappear it, but it gives
the energy of grief movement.
>>EDWARDS: Right.
>>LISA: That is very,
I think, worthwhile.
>>EDWARDS: Well.
>>LISA: Because I see my
mom sitting with the grief,
and it's solidifying,
and it's immobilizing.
And I can't tell
her, Mom, you need
to get up and move because
she can't hear it right now.
>>EDWARDS: Right.
>>LISA: And so that's
the type of movement
that that ceremony does.
And it's metaphorical,
of course, right?
>>EDWARDS: Right.
Well, it's metaphorical,
but it's also
about ways of grieving.
Dancing, you were talking
about moving, wailing.
And so many cultures wail.
And that's so great to
get it out of your system,
and express it and
move it and shake it.
And to sit still with
it is almost unbearable.
>>LISA: It is.
It's very challenging.
There was another one that you
mentioned called the Rainbow
Bridge?
>>EDWARDS: OK, that's a
despacho ceremony, where
this is a ceremony from Peru.
It's called aya despacho.
Aya means death.
Despacho means to dispatch.
And you build, with tissue paper
and all kinds of ingredients--
herbs and flowers
and rose petals--
you build a Rainbow Bridge
with different layers.
A black layer, a red
layer, a green layer,
blue layer, which is like
the mountains, and then
a purple layer and a gold layer.
And with your prayers, you
keep putting your prayers
into this prayer bundle,
and once it's all complete,
you fold it up and either
burn it in a ceremonial fire,
releasing your prayers so that
they can go to the other side
and be delivered,
or, in these days,
we have a lot of cremations, you
can put a despacho if there's
no metals or unusual materials
in it, if it's all natural,
you can send it to the
crematorium with the deceased.
So the prayers actually go into
the fire with the deceased.
>>LISA: Oh, that's beautiful.
>>EDWARDS: Yeah.
>>LISA: Yes, in a sense,
it brings the dreams
into the next lifetime,
or into the eternal.
>>EDWARDS: Right.
>>LISA: Whatever
you want to believe.
>>EDWARDS: Right.
>>LISA: And it does.
And that process of my prayer
for him, my dream for him,
my love for him, my
gratitude for him
all is the process of grieving.
>>EDWARDS: Right.
>>LISA: Again, it
moves the energy.
>>EDWARDS: Well, and
creating your own ritual.
We all create ritual.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>EDWARDS: This is not
something you can't do yourself,
but creating your own
ritual to set your intention
to remember him and thank him.
>>LISA: Well, can I ask
you about this process
with the urn?
>>EDWARDS: The
process with the urn--
>>LISA: I know this is
making this so personal,
but I have to just-- it's so
fresh that, when my mom went
to go pick up the urn from
the mortuary with his ashes,
what do you do with it?
Put it in the front
seat with the seat belt?
I mean, what do you put it--
I mean, what do you do?
And we got stuck, like
what do we do with this?
>>EDWARDS: You know, that's
the first time I've been asked
that, but that's wonderful--
>>LISA: It was mind-bending.
>>EDWARDS: --because I have
been in that same situation.
>>LISA: You have.
>>EDWARDS: Yeah.
>>LISA: There's got to be--
>>EDWARDS: I picked up--
>>LISA: --a better way.
>>EDWARDS: --my grandmother,
and my grandmother
was a very proper Southern lady.
She always had to be properly
made up and properly dressed
and looking beautiful.
And when I went to
pick her up, they
handed me her in a little box
wrapped in sort of dirty paper.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>EDWARDS: And I'm thinking,
oh my, oh my, I'm so sorry.
>>LISA: It doesn't
make sense, right?
>>EDWARDS: Yeah.
>>LISA: That this-- I mean,
ashes to ashes, dust to dust.
And I was trying to explain
to my mom particles,
and nothing was working.
>>EDWARDS: No.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>EDWARDS: There's no good way.
I did put her in
the back seat, and I
did put a seat belt around
her, if you want to know.
We all do that.
And I drove her home,
and I met my brother,
who had just arrived,
in the hotel lobby.
And he says, what do you got?
And I said, oh, that's--
>>LISA: Grandma
in the back seat.
>>EDWARDS: No,
she's in my hands.
He's like, what are
you doing with her?
I said, I'm going to put her
in the closet in the room
until we need her again.
>>LISA: Right.
>>EDWARDS: But I need to change
her and decorate her somehow.
>>LISA: Well luckily, my
mom made a space for him
before he came.
>>EDWARDS: Oh, good.
>>LISA: And she--
>>EDWARDS: That's preparation.
>>LISA: --she had the
foresight to do a double box.
And there's half for
her and half for him.
And then when she passes,
the ashes are combined,
and then they're together.
>>EDWARDS: Wonderful.
>>LISA: And instead
of putting him
in the closet,
which we discussed,
we put him in the living room.
>>EDWARDS: Yeah, why not?
>>LISA: With the pictures of
the family on the shelves.
>>EDWARDS: Mhm, mhm.
>>LISA: Right where they used
to sit and watch TV in their two
chairs, and just right there.
And it was awesome
because the dog
got up and sat in his chair.
He's sitting right
next to both of them.
>>EDWARDS: That's perfect.
>>LISA: And you know, this is
the type of thing we actually
wound up laughing
over, which was great
because it was so absurd.
>>EDWARDS: But great,
and perfect for him,
who had such a great
sense of humor.
>>LISA: He did.
>>EDWARDS: Yeah.
>>LISA: Such a great comedian.
>>EDWARDS: That was perfect.
Yeah, wonderful.
>>LISA: So there's
got to be, as you say,
anticipation of these moments
to have some type of ceremony
around them.
Even if it's something
you make up on the fly--
>>EDWARDS: Right.
>>LISA: --and you
figure out, it's
just that honoring, because
the death process does
tend to be mechanized.
And it's a business.
Like anything else,
it's a business.
And the size of the
coffin and the colors
inside the coffin and the type
of wood the coffin's made--
It gets to be very
business-like.
>>EDWARDS: It is a business.
>>LISA: It's costly.
>>EDWARDS: It's a big business.
>>LISA: It is.
>>EDWARDS: It is costly.
There's a big movement for
green funerals and more
natural funerals these days.
In fact, just right
here in Colorado,
they've opened a new--
it's called the
Natural Funeral Home.
And when you walk in their door,
they do have pots for urns,
but they're all made by
Colorado local artists.
>>LISA: Oh, nice.
>>EDWARDS: And there's a
panel on the wall of three
different kinds of woods.
And there's a local carpenter
that will make you a coffin.
You choose the wood.
And they have artists that will
paint the coffin, if you wish.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>EDWARDS: So I think
things are changing.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>EDWARDS: I have
hope that we're
going to be creating different
traditions for dying.
>>LISA: Yes, and anyone who
went through that process,
please know that I'm
not making it wrong.
I'm just looking at the entire
would-- a dear friend of ours
who went through
this process with us
and lost his dad
a month prior, he
took pleasure in picking out
what his dad would have wanted.
The velvet inside the coffin.
I mean--
>>EDWARDS: Absolutely.
>>LISA: --it brought
him pleasure.
>>EDWARDS: Absolutely.
And different traditions
require different things.
>>LISA: Mhm.
>>EDWARDS: So it's
really making your ritual
true to your values.
>>LISA: Yes.
And whatever works for you.
It doesn't have to be perfect.
>>EDWARDS: No.
>>LISA: But can we
go back to that idea
of living without any
regrets, no regrets.
You have a whole foundation
called the No Regrets
Foundation.
>>EDWARDS: Right,
that was started
by Patti Panza, who created
the project in the last six
months of her life.
This is her legacy.
And she developed five
practices she thought
would help her get to her
deathbed with no regrets.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>EDWARDS: And so she shared
it with everyone else.
And those practices are
be grateful every day,
choose joy, trust,
and take the risk,
have the courage to be
yourself, and love yourself
first, and then share it.
That's a hard one.
>>LISA: That's the hardest one.
>>EDWARDS: Meaning that if
you give everything away,
you will have
nothing left to give.
So love yourself first.
And we don't-- caregivers have
a very hard time with that
because they have so much to do.
>>LISA: Yes.
Constantly.
>>EDWARDS: Yeah.
So for caregivers,
it's that, you
know, OK, step back, take care
of yourself, and then share it.
>>LISA: That was the
hardest thing for my mom,
because she was
constantly tugged.
If she wasn't at the
hospital, she felt guilty.
When she was at the
Trying to make the phone
calls of all the preparations
for hospice or whatnot.
Any moment she wasn't
with him-- and me,
too, when I wasn't with my
father, every moment, who
am I to be working,
what am I thinking.
I should be spending
every moment with him.
And what would you tell
people dealing with that?
I still haven't resolved that.
>>EDWARDS: Do you have a regret?
>>LISA: The only
regret I have is,
towards the last
days of his life,
I could see energetically
he was not there.
And I intuitively knew
he was at the end.
And I went into an anger.
I'm like, what
are we doing here?
And I regret that, because now
I look back, and that's a stage,
it's a normal stage.
And I'm such a doer, I'm
like, what are we doing here?
And I am ashamed of that.
Like, what do you mean,
what are you doing here?
Like, what are we doing, Dad?
What are we doing, Dad?
Come on.
It wasn't like that, but
it was in my own mind
I was saying that.
And I was looking at my dad.
And everybody's talking
and having conversations,
and there's my dad dying.
And it was so surreal
that I-- and I
had my laptop because things
were blowing up at work.
And I'm like, this
is too surreal.
This is wrong.
Something about this
moment is wrong.
And then I stopped
everybody, and I said, look,
this is just too surreal.
I have the laptop, and the
nurse is talking about what type
of medication he wants to die
with, and someone over there
is on the phone.
And I'm like, ugh.
Yeah, I had a moment.
I have a regret
about that moment.
>>EDWARDS: OK.
Do you want to work
with that regret?
We can do a little ceremony,
if you're up for it.
>>LISA: Please.
>>EDWARDS: OK.
I brought some stones with me.
>>LISA: You brought--
>>EDWARDS: From the No
Regrets Project, just for you.
>>LISA: Oh my goodness.
You brought a Show and Tell.
OK.
>>EDWARDS: I did, I did.
So I'm going to
give you this stone,
and then I want you
to pick two other ones
to work with right now.
>>LISA: OK.
These two.
>>EDWARDS: So let's just
work with that black stone
right now.
So with the black
stone, the regret
is something you regret
doing or something
you regret not doing, right?
And oftentimes, regret
tricks us into thinking
we've missed something.
So we're going to create a
little expansion in your energy
field so that that regret
can get a little bigger.
So I want you to close your eyes
and step back into that anger.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>EDWARDS: That just
surreal situation.
And your regret for even
getting into that situation.
Yeah.
And just let it grow in your
system, and like how shocking
it was.
>>LISA: It was wrong.
>>EDWARDS: It was wrong.
So blow that into
the stone right now.
No, I want you to put that
stone right up to your face
and blow it like [BLOWING].
>>LISA: [BLOWING]
>>EDWARDS: That's good.
>>LISA: helps.
That's good.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>EDWARDS: OK.
So if you give me
the black stone,
I'm going to give
you another stone.
Here you go.
>>LISA: OK.
>>EDWARDS: OK.
You OK?
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>EDWARDS: OK.
So oftentimes,
regrets do fool us.
But every time we regret,
we have a regret on action
we took, in your case, that
we regret, we learn a lesson.
Can you think a lesson you might
have learned from that regret?
>>LISA: Yes.
>>EDWARDS: OK,
what might that be?
>>LISA: Patience.
Patience.
Yeah.
>>EDWARDS: OK.
>>LISA: Yeah.
And to be instead of
need to figure it out.
>>EDWARDS: Right.
Right.
>>LISA: And it was--
I think it is just the typical
response in the moment,
you know?
There was something wrong
there that wasn't being voiced.
That's another thing,
is to use my voice when
things are just wrong.
>>EDWARDS: Right.
>>LISA: It's a hot topic for me.
>>EDWARDS: OK.
Use your voice.
>>LISA: It's a hot topic for me.
>>EDWARDS: OK.
>>LISA: When I see
injustice and wrong,
that's why I do what I do.
>>EDWARDS: OK.
And you do all this
work because of that.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>EDWARDS: Yeah.
So the lesson you
take from that regret
is you'll be
stronger and better--
>>LISA: Yes.
>>EDWARDS: --at speaking--
>>EDWARDS: --your voice.
>>LISA: When things are wrong.
>>EDWARDS: OK.
So I want that speech
right here in your throat.
Just take a couple
of deep breaths,
and just know you can
speak your truth, right?
You can do it.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>EDWARDS: You can make
a commitment to do that.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>EDWARDS: And so blow
that speech into the stone.
>>LISA: [EXHALING]
Yeah, that has to
have speech with it.
Whew.
Yes.
>>EDWARDS: So if I
take that stone--
>>LISA: Yes.
>>EDWARDS: --I'm going to give
you this stone back again.
>>LISA: That's a power stone.
>>EDWARDS: That's
your power stone.
So I want your grief--
let your grief just come up.
We've been hearing it.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>EDWARDS: We know it's there.
So just let it come up.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>EDWARDS: And
when you're ready,
blow your grief into the stone,
just to share with the stone
your grief.
>>LISA: [EXHALING]
You know, that helps so much.
>>EDWARDS: Ok, one more step.
>>LISA: That helps so much.
We've got another step?
OK.
>>EDWARDS: On the other
side of grief is joy.
So in your mind's
eye right now, I just
want you to think of
something that brings you joy.
A person, an animal, a place.
>>LISA: Yeah.
My daughter.
>>EDWARDS: Visualize,
you got it in your heart?
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>EDWARDS: You got that?
Well, blow it right
into that stone.
>>LISA: [EXHALING]
She makes me laugh.
[EXHALING]
>>EDWARDS: OK.
So take all these stones and
put them up to your heart.
>>LISA: Wow.
It's joy and grief and
empowerment and voice.
>>EDWARDS: And voice.
And hold them to
your heart, and just
breathe through
your heart a bit.
>>LISA: [EXHALING]
>>EDWARDS: This is the way
you love yourself, Lisa.
This is the way you love
yourself first, and then share
it, by holding
yourself in your heart.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>EDWARDS: That's no regrets.
>>LISA: That's beautiful.
>>EDWARDS: Isn't that wonderful?
>>LISA: I can feel
all of the people
that are thinking about their
regrets of the end of life
with their loved ones, and how
it's possible to release those.
>>EDWARDS: Right.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>EDWARDS: You can
take these stones home
and share them with
your loved ones.
There are other stones
for the other practices.
>>LISA: Because they'll watch
this show, and then they'll
understand what they mean.
>>EDWARDS: There you go.
There you go.
>>LISA: Which is amazing.
>>EDWARDS: And the other
thing we have in here--
and you can take
this home, too--
we have a little
lotus flower altar.
And you can create your
own ritual around it.
It has the practices
inside of it.
>>LISA: Oh, I love this.
>>EDWARDS: Be
grateful every day.
>>LISA: Oh.
>>EDWARDS: Trust, take the risk.
So if you're going to take a
risk, you know, step in there
and trust it.
Have the courage to
be me, and choose joy.
But in the center
is love myself--
>>LISA: And share it.
>>EDWARDS: --and share it.
>>LISA: Oh, this is beautiful.
What a wonderful gift to
give someone who is grieving.
Because again, it's--
I know I keep saying this, but
it gives purpose to grieving.
It gives motion.
>>EDWARDS: Mhm.
>>LISA: Motion.
>>EDWARDS: Well, this
is why we use breath.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>EDWARDS: That's
not accidental.
>>LISA: That helped.
>>EDWARDS: This is the energy.
And we use stones--
this is from Peru, the
high mountains of Peru--
because stones
hold wisdom for us.
So you don't have to remember
which is the lodestone
or which is the joy stone.
They all just hold
your essence for you.
And when you need to move
something like your grief,
just to get a little space,
you can blow it into a stone
and then put it on an altar, or
in your purse or on your desk.
>>LISA: Any stone.
>>EDWARDS: So that's
just a little part.
And rituals are easy
to create, but probably
a little forethought helps.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>EDWARDS: Yes.
A little preparation.
>>LISA: It ceremonializes
something and gives it meaning.
>>EDWARDS: Right.
>>LISA: And it starts
the closure process.
>>EDWARDS: Right.
>>LISA: Even if
there wasn't closure
in that situation with the
funeral of the suicide.
Did that family begin some type
of closure from that process?
>>EDWARDS: They began.
It's a long road.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>EDWARDS: But what happens
is you move the guilt
a little bit out of the way.
You move the things
that will stop you
from grieving ritually.
The anger.
>>LISA: Oh, yes.
>>EDWARDS: A lot of people are
angry when there's a suicide,
or feel guilty that they
didn't see it coming.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>EDWARDS: And those are
emotions that we want to move.
They're real, but we want to
move them so that the grief can
come in and be truly expressed.
>>LISA: How can we help
others like my mom, where
I want to help her grieve,
but yet she's not necessarily
ready for it right now?
>>EDWARDS: Right.
>>LISA: She's in the doing
of the memorial and all.
>>EDWARDS: Right.
Everybody grieves differently.
>>LISA: OK.
>>EDWARDS: Respect your mom, and
respect her grieving process.
It will be very different
six months from now,
when there's no plans
for a funeral or taking
care of the last will and
the estate, things like that.
Maybe share some rituals where
you and your mother can create.
Maybe going out on a
walk to a special place.
That's a ritual.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>EDWARDS: Going to
sit on a bench that's
a special place,
that's a ritual.
Make it a ritual
so that you do it.
And I always tell everyone,
on the anniversary
of your father's
death, plan ahead.
>>LISA: OK.
>>EDWARDS: Have
a ritual in mind.
Even if you're by yourself,
be aware that the energy
that that anniversary can
really lay you low with grief.
So have a ritual in order
to expect the grief.
I know you're coming, so we're
going to celebrate together.
>>LISA: Like what?
What could we do?
>>EDWARDS: Well, I take a
three-day retreat on the--
my mother died on a Friday--
she went into a coma on
a Friday on her birthday,
and she died on a
Sunday, a three-day.
Every year, I take
a three-day retreat.
Nobody interferes with that.
No work.
>>LISA: Every year.
>>EDWARDS: Every year.
And in the beginning, I would,
you know, talk to my mom,
and I'd read her journals,
and I'd put pictures up,
and I'd cook her favorite soup.
>>LISA: Aw.
>>EDWARDS: But
after 15 years now,
it's my mom coming
to take care of me.
>>LISA: Ah.
>>EDWARDS: I get to rest.
I get to do something, maybe
go get a manicure or something
fun.
>>LISA: Ah.
>>EDWARDS: And I hear my mom.
She's taking care of me now.
>>LISA: That's amazing.
>>EDWARDS: So grief shifts.
It changes.
But it's our time together.
And people, because we think
we have to get over grief,
that's not true.
We don't get over grief,
we get better at it.
But we don't usually get
over a really important loss.
>>LISA: So it's living
with dying and with grief.
>>EDWARDS: Exactly.
>>LISA: Constantly.
It doesn't go away.
>>EDWARDS: No.
And our goal as an organization
is help people build resilience
while living with loss.
>>LISA: Mhm.
Yes.
And there's a maternity
leave and a paternity leave,
but there's not necessarily
a grieving leave.
>>EDWARDS: No.
>>LISA: Yeah.
For those of us that have
to get back to work, and--
although I love what I do
and this doesn't really
work for me, but it's actually
helpful for me to be here.
>>EDWARDS: Of course.
>>LISA: Yeah, to do this.
>>EDWARDS: And get
back in your routines.
>>LISA: To talk with people
like you, I mean, my goodness.
>>EDWARDS: How did this happen?
>>LISA: Yeah, because
we had this interview
scheduled several months before,
and it happened this time.
>>EDWARDS: Yeah.
>>LISA: What can people do?
I noticed that you have, you
know, Conscious Transitions,
you have a program, a workshop.
What is it that you teach,
or how do you take people
through this process?
>>EDWARDS: Well, we work a
lot with hospice workers,
medical workers, doctors,
nurses, psychiatrists.
We help them language death and
create a different relationship
with death.
We also work with
the general public,
helping them language
death in a different way.
Right now, we're running
a program this year
called Conscious Transitions,
Preparing Your Literal
Documents.
And this started in January.
I decided I was going to
get my documents rewritten.
They're getting sort of old.
And I thought,
well, I'm just going
to take all our subscribers
through with me.
And every month,
something appears.
So the first month, it was
just conversations about death.
And then a friend of
mine died, and I had
to help her in the hospital.
I was her medical agent.
And so the next month, I wrote
about you need a medical agent.
You need to appoint
someone who's strong--
>>LISA: You do.
>>EDWARDS: --and can help you.
And you need--
>>LISA: Can make
those decisions.
>>EDWARDS: --to tell
them what you want.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>EDWARDS: And
then last month, I
was starting on the
medical directives.
You know, choosing different
medical procedures,
or not choosing them.
And then this month
was on solace care.
And this is comfort care,
like what kind of songs
do you want to hear
as you're dying
or who do you want
at your deathbed,
and is there a ritual you want.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>EDWARDS: So next month,
it'll be funeral planning.
So I'm doing this
all for myself.
So I'm writing--
>>LISA: For your own funeral.
>>EDWARDS: For my
own funeral, but I'm
coming up with
questions that might
help other people
like, oh, yeah,
like maybe I should
visit a mortuary
and go figure out what this is.
That's really scary for people.
But I've got to tell
you, mortuary people
get very excited when people
show up who aren't grieving,
just to chat.
They're like oh,
wow, this is fun.
>>LISA: This is the process.
>>EDWARDS: This is the process.
>>LISA: That's
interesting, yeah.
>>EDWARDS: So we do
different things.
We sort of mix it up.
We have teachers
all over the country
that are doing workshops.
And we're creating ceremony
and doing our own thing.
>>LISA: It's amazing.
And you have a whole
institute here in Boulder.
And it's the Living and--
>>EDWARDS: Dying
Consciously Project.
>>LISA: Consciously Project.
>>EDWARDS: Yeah.
And you can visit
our website site
at
livinganddyingconsciously.org.
We're all shamanic
practitioners.
>>LISA: That helps.
>>EDWARDS: And we're
all about rituals
and helping people
live life consciously,
with lots of joy and energy.
>>LISA: I love that you brought
this aspect in of planning
your own transition.
Not only is it super
helpful for your loved ones,
but it also honors
the way that--
it takes the fear out
of it for you, in a way.
>>EDWARDS: Mhm.
>>LISA: Dannion Brinkley, who is
an amazing advocate of hospice
and has created the Hospice
Projects and so forth, he told
me about a frequency
on YouTube that
is an eight-hour-long loop.
And you just type in 528 Hertz.
>>EDWARDS: Wonderful.
>>LISA: And it's the frequency
of the earth and of love.
And that frequency just
played next to my dad's head
the whole time.
And it was aligning,
and it's said
to align the DNA with
that frequency of love.
So he was at peace.
>>EDWARDS: Aw.
>>LISA: And we
had that going on.
And it was a really--
we created our own ceremony,
if you look back at it.
>>EDWARDS: You did.
>>LISA: It was an
amazing experience.
>>EDWARDS: You did.
>>LISA: And I thank you for
letting me come and process
this with you, and with my
wonderful family online.
>>EDWARDS: Mhm.
>>LISA: My wonderful
"Inspirations" family.
Thank you for
sharing this with me
and allowing me to go through
this process with you.
Thank you.
>>EDWARDS: I wish you
luck this weekend.
>>LISA: Yes.
Well, this will help because--
>>EDWARDS: Go forward.
>>LISA: --I wasn't able
to write the eulogy.
I couldn't get it out.
I was writing dates
and statistics,
and this is like,
this wasn't him.
>>EDWARDS: That's not a eulogy.
A eulogy is a story.
>>LISA: Yeah, it is.
>>EDWARDS: Yeah, tell a story.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>EDWARDS: Laugh.
>>EDWARDS: Tell a lot of jokes.
>>LISA: I know.
I've got to get those--
I've got to text
my brother tonight,
ok we need George Carlin,
we need like the good--
>>EDWARDS: We need
some good jokes.
>>LISA: --old-school jokes.
>>EDWARDS: Yeah.
Those people need to laugh.
>>LISA: That's going to go
over well in the church.
>>EDWARDS: It will.
It will.
>>LISA: It's all good with me.
>>EDWARDS: Yeah.
>>LISA: I think you've
kind of explained this,
but what is the biggest why
that you do what you do?
>>EDWARDS: Heart connection.
I wake up every morning and
want to make a heart connection
with the people I'm working
with or the people I'm
working-- you know, visiting
my family, with you.
So it's finding ways
to make our connection
through ritual and ceremony.
>>LISA: That you do.
>>EDWARDS: That's my why.
>>LISA: And you
have given me that.
Thank you so much.
>>EDWARDS: You're
welcome so much.
>>LISA: And I shared
that with you all, too.
Thank you so much
for allowing me
to process this with you,
my beautiful "Inspirations"
family.
I love you all so
much, and I would
like to dedicate this show
to my dad, Dr. Edward Garr.
I love you.
[MUSIC PLAYING]